okay thank you everybody uh welcome to
the town of Andover Board of Finance uh
public hearing uh for the town budget
for the fiscal years 2025
2026 um we're going to go ahead and call
the meeting to order and recite the
Pledge of Allegiance the pledge
allegiance to the flag the United States
of America and to the Republic which it
stands one nation under God indivisible
with liberty Liber and justice for all
okay thank you um so our main goal with
this meeting is to receive any comments
from the public on the budget uh I'd
like to spend a couple of minutes up
front um just talking a little bit about
the budget of showing briefly where we
are I know possibly not everybody has
had a chance to look at it um or follow
the meetings or the developments uh as
we've gone along here there's been an
awful lot of work that's gone into this
and and a lot of long meetings
Etc um but I'd like to just give you a
brief overview uh before we do start
though I I just want to make a couple of
comments about participation tonight
everyone's participation and comments
are welcome uh we do want it to move
along pretty efficiently so a couple of
of ground rules I'd like you to try to
observe uh first off um try to keep your
your your comments fairly brief and to
the point uh keep them to three minutes
or less if you can and you know if we
need to come back to you later if you've
got more to say you know we can
certainly do that but we want to make
sure everyone has time to participate
that wants to
participate um you know without uh you
know without undo uh time uh for
everybody the other thing is to uh just
noting that if if you happen to agree
with somebody something somebody has
said previously then you can simply say
you know I want to agree with what this
person had previously and support that
uh and then go on uh we don't need to
necessarily repeat all the arguments
Etc um couple comments too about the
education portion of the budget this is
probably not the place to provide public
comment on the educational portion of
the budget that has been uh discussed
and gone through uh during the Board of
Ed meetings so uh it's not in the board
of Finance purview to change those line
items at this time either the ram budget
or the Andover Elementary School Board
of Education budget if you have uh
questions or comments they're best
directed to the Board of Ed and the
superintendent um and of course there
will be a town meeting next week in
which you can participate and uh you
know uh this the budget will be
discussed and Incorporated at that point
uh but this is primarily I think uh
going to focus on the town's operating a
capital budget okay all right um I guess
with that being said we will go ahead
and move on in the agenda which is our
uh our we're going to receive comments
from the public uh before we do I'll
just take a couple moments to share the
highlights more spreadsheet seems like
I've been uh been staring at these all
day
today okay you should be seeing my
screen I will uh just point out some
things I'm not going to spend a lot of
time going over the details I primarily
want to hit the highlights so I'm going
to move straight to the bottom line here
okay um the town of Andover budget is
made up of three primary entities and
they all contribute about equally to the
to the town's budgets and
expenses um the Andover elementary
school has a proposed budget of 4 thou
4,729 1555 you can see that on row uh 24
here I'll bump it up just for any of you
looking at a small screen um the ram
budget um is proposed at about $
4,135 th000 and then we have the town
operating budget which it is at
$4,991 th000 roughly okay so those are
the three main contributors to the town
budget uh you know which uh end up at a
you know the total the total amount with
those three uh ends up being uh
13,56 ,000 and some change there so it's
a significant budget um you know but as
you can see there's there's some changes
here the the Handover Elementary uh
budget the requested budget from the
board of education is uh set at about
88.8% higher than previous U there's a
lot of reasons for that that they've
explained in some of the workshops
Etc um the ram budget is actually going
down this year um because the Andover
percentage of Andover students attending
Ram is decreased for this year and then
the town budget um is actually reduced
over the total fiscal year budget for
2425 by about
2.6% that leaves the total uh increase
at about a 2% increase so certainly less
than the cost of inflation uh that we've
been looking at
recently so what does this mean to the
mill rate uh the mill rate uh is
actually going to increase about
4% um it again that doesn't mean that
taxes are going to go up 4 % taxes are
actually going to go only go up under
this budget by about 2% so the 4% is
really about how the taxes are allocated
because of changes that the to the way
that the
legislature uh had had the kind of they
they added some legislation that
required us to Value vehicles in a
different way so the vehicle property
tax value changed it's offset um by
increased taxation basically in the mill
rate so you had to increase the mill
rate to make up the difference for the
vehicle uh values under the grand list
and so you know in in a way you could
kind of think of it as shifting that the
tax burden more to uh to homeowners or
Property Owners uh and less towards the
individual vehicles that the town of
hand over taxpayers
own so some complicating things it's a
little bit complicated we happy to
explain those in more detail if anybody
has any questions but but that's the
upshot so we're looking at about a 2 %
increase uh total TA by total taxation
increase under this budget um and we'll
go through uh just some of the details
real
quick um total tax revenue we're looking
at about uh these are various Reven
taxation Revenue by taxation so we're
looking at about um that's not right
about 10 million derived from current
year taxes and about 341,000 derived
from other taxes prior year taxes leans
interest taxes and uh some other per
personal property
taxes we're also expecting about $2
million in uh intergovernmental revenues
which is really the grants we get from
the state and other sources um so that's
educational cost sharing is the biggest
piece of that that's the our allocation
from the state to help pay for the
schools
okay um some investment interest uh
Treasurer and Eric have worked real well
they've
gotten really uh rewarding interest
bearing account in which we've been uh
investing the town's uh funds uh and
that's been very successful it's about
$150,000 in Revenue uh annually so uh
that's that's been a great help for the
town uh education as I said the the ram
budget's about $4.1 million this year uh
the AES Board of Ed budget is about 4 .7
million okay and again those are uh
those are normally discussed and
reviewed in other other venues um so we
we normally wouldn't talk about them at
Great length here U but you know if you
do have questions we do our best to to
answer
them um and then there's a lot of
departmental budgets uh available you
know the the town Administration the tax
collectors the assessor the registar the
elections cost the building departments
Library community
center um town office uh Building
Maintenance and
management um Insurance employee
benefits Etc town hall to garage Old
Firehouse Town attorney uh Public Works
is a big one there's about 457,000
allocated to Public Works um we have
another 100,000 just for snow removal so
you see things like that transfer
station management a couple hundred,
dollar
uh recycling ground care Etc Public
Safety the resident state troopers a
significant line item uh the fire
department significantly significant
line
item um Public Welfare there's a lot of
smaller budgetary costs in there um the
various commissions and Boards tend to
be fairly
minor and then we have Capital so every
year we uh both put money into capital
accounts and we take money out of
capital accounts for various items so
these are the major expenditures that
the the town may may go through uh
there's a contingency fund which we use
every year to just manage in case we
have any overages in various departments
uh the multi-use building fund this used
to be called the senior center fund but
it helps support some of the multi-use
building uh fire engine fund this is
paying for the uh payments on the uh the
new uh truck or tanker that uh we as a
town voted on last year
uh Public Works equipment funds same
thing that amount of money is allocated
uh to vehicles that have been purchased
um and then there's various Road
Improvement funds tree removal Bunker
Hill bridge bridg and Culver fund uh
building main fund uh and the Andor
Elementary School Capital fund okay
which is actually uh at zero this year
and a small and a small open space fund
which we actually also zeroed this year
as a proposed budget and we have no debt
so there's no debt retirement or
interest expense and we should all be
pretty happy about that I think that's a
appropriate uh uh for us to
uh as a small town we sure don't want to
have uh any long-term debt that we don't
need okay so stating that I guess uh
Eric I'm gonna I'm going to stop sharing
now unless somebody needs something else
and so let's go around and collect uh
input from the
public you want me to do that or you
want to do that um I'll tell you what I
can go ahead and do
that okay so what I'll do is I will call
on each member of the public that I see
um by the name that's showed on the
screen and if you have anything to
contribute just unmute yourself and and
you can speak if you don't have anything
if you can unmute yourself and just let
us say you know you're all set and we'll
move on so the first person in my I just
say Jed Larson looks like he has a hand
raised I we should have people raise
their hand and no well let's go around I
just I'd rather go around not not
everybody listening may have the ability
to click on a screen and do the hand
raise thing
easily so although I I I appreciate that
the sense of possibly doing it uh uh in
uh an efficient manner so uh Jed you're
the first person on my uh list you want
to go ahead and uh unmute yourself okay
well if I have my hand raised I didn't
do it intentionally and I look at my
screen and don't see it there but uh I
did want to at least voice the concern
that
the I was disappointed when we
eliminated the uh open space funding you
know it was a a fairly small amount of
money that we were trying to put in the
budget to try and boost that fund and uh
and I know the budget's tough this year
um
but you know I was actually I thought we
had a good conversation on the uh the
value of open space a year ago when we
put it in and so you I was really hoping
the finance board was going to increase
the the cut that the board of selectman
put in there but uh so
um you know we talked about the increase
in the budget being less than the rate
of inflation and we end up cutting the
town budget which really means that uh
you know it's a bigger cut than we have
listed there because it doesn't account
for the inflation and and so I was
hoping that that we would consider you
know either 25,000 or 50,000 I don't
think that's a big uh budget driver one
way or the other uh keeping that in
because I do think it's a beneficial to
the town we don't see that benefit today
but at some point we're going to and
it's kind of like an insurance policy
and and there have been a couple of nice
properties over the last couple of years
years where we could have got State
matching funds to match us but we just
didn't have the money put aside to uh to
go out and pursue those and I feel bad
that we missed those opportunities so I
would just ask the finance board to
consider putting that small amount of
money back into the budget since uh
since we are cutting the town budget
overall and that was
it okay uh thank you Jud appreciate
it okay you could go ahead and mute
yourself if you would and next up I have
Pat
galdi I have nothing to add thank you
okay thanks Pat next I have
Carol I'm all set for now thanks Mark
okay thank you Carol uh Linda
fish all
set okay Dian grener
can't hear you you're muted Diane no I
think she un muted I'm hearing
something there's some kind of audio
interference doesn't seem to be can't
catch anything she's
saying it says connecting to audio maybe
it's there okay try
now try it now there you go are oh okay
all right okay good thank you um I
apologize well first let me let me thank
you guys for all the hard work to put
this together I know that's a it's a
major job and keeping this down to 2% uh
is a applaudable thank you very much um
I I apologize I've have not looked at
the budget so I'm I'm winging it here um
and the one of my questions is is this
the place where we can ask you to
consider adding things to the budget or
is this only the one where you can
subtract things this you you can ask for
any changes that you want so the board
of Finance has not finalized this budget
I think we're pretty close to where we
uh final we taking votes on all the key
areas um in the town meeting next week
once we have a finalized recommended
budget uh which we'll present then at
that point we can only reduce the total
budget we can't add to it okay well um I
don't know if it's in there or not but
um the board of selectman know a couple
months back back um decided not to um
pursue a $4,000 for the community center
for their um software package to help
with their recordings and things and if
that's not in there I would like to um
ask that you consider purchasing that um
software package for the community
Senior Center um I don't think that um
Tess I think she's terribly overwhelmed
being part-time is there's too much work
for a part-time person to start with and
she should not be spending her time
shuffling paper um doing reports and all
all those sort of things and I think the
$4,000 for the software package was a
shortsighted by the board of Selectmen
and I think they ended up saying that
they were going to give it 30 60 90 days
and then readdress it and I think this
is a time that should be looked at and
um re reconsidered I think that's um
really important I also think that uh uh
that position the director should be a
full-time position again I think there's
um way too much work and too much
expectation for uh the director to be
doing this on a part-time basis and
without the software and all the tools
that um are required to do the job
properly so that's my my input thank you
okay thank you um it's good input um
appreciate it a couple of things uh I'll
I'll comment on
um it's it's certainly within the
purview of the board of Finance to add
$4,000 to the uh line item for the
operating budget I I do want to point
out that we cannot make the decision to
purchase a software or anything else
though so that's really the executive
branch function which would be the
select one um they they we could we
could request that funding go into the
budget um and that's something we could
we could take up in our a subsequent
meeting when where we're going to try to
finalize the budget today or tomorrow
tomorrow um but we don't know whether uh
whether they it gets purchased or not
we'd be up to the board of Selectmen so
well I see we have some of the bard of
selectman on on here and Eric as well
we're not gonna have that discussion
tonight though no but it's just listen
up boys listen up yeah yeah for sure
thank you okay thank you Diane okay next
I see
Jesse uh good
evening uh I have a question if I may
yeah
does the board of Finance accept the
Andor elementary school budget and just
plug it into the town
budget uh yes well it's part of the
budget that the town yeah the budget
submission the board of Finance does not
review it before we plug it into the
spreadsheet no we review it but for the
town Charter uh we're not supposed to
make any changes to it okay we we don't
have line item authority over the board
of Ed's budget that's their perview
we do go over it with the
superintendent
by all right thank you for the education
I appreciate
it thank you Mark Joanne y yeah I just I
first of all I just want to say thank
you to everybody that turned out tonight
this is what we look forward to I know
we've had a lot of long meetings you
know where we discussed a lot of things
in depth and hearing from the taxpayers
about whatever they want to talk about
is fine with me um and and I understand
you know I I look forward to this night
because that's when we get the input of
course we're going to get a lot of
things that they want to be added in or
whatever but some of the things that
we're already discussed tonight we we
did discuss in depth I mean it's never
easy to make cuts um I know someone
talked about the open space I won't but
we went you know in depth about why you
know why we made that cut so that was
discussed at our last meeting
um yeah but I just want to appreciate
everybody that took the time you know I
used to be one of the ones sitting in
the audience there so thank you all for
being here and and giving us your
feedback yeah
sure okay move on to Maryann
gu hi I'm trying to start my video here
all right Mary y we can see you we can
hear you okay right hi I'm the chair of
the concer ation commission and um I
just want to um agree strongly with what
Jed Larson said regarding the funding
for open space and I just want to add
that the reason we pursue open space is
it's such a benefit to the town and
we've been told on many occasions that
when surveys are done of taxpayers and
residents in town that um open space
acquisition and maintenance is always
something that's generally supported and
popular so we're not speaking just for
ourselves but for Town residents and as
Jed mentioned we um as an example we had
an opportunity to purchase a property uh
large pieces of property that are
desirable in terms of conservation open
space purchase do not come up for sale
often and because of the um cost of the
property and how long we're talking
months it takes to get funding from a
state Grant we lost the opportunity to
purchase the property so I expect the
same will happen in the future we scan
the real estate ads and we try and
purchase but unless we have some kind of
funding um readily available it's very
likely that any um additional desirable
properties that come up will be lost to
us because we don't have the funding
available and it's purchased on the open
market for development or for house
building or whatever so I just want to
mention that it's something that I don't
think there's an actual amount we need
to put in every year but at least
something should be contributed every
year so that the account grows and we
make some investment money on it and um
that should be kept in mind and the
members of the commission are all very
interested in seeing that happen if
possible thank you okay very thank you
very much
Maran uh next I have Scott
psan yeah hi he's got hi I I'd like to
also talk about the open
space um you know the board of selectman
took took $25,000 off of it and uh and
then you guys took another $225,000 off
you know I I believe what Jed and Maran
is saying in the state the state asks
the towns it's not mandated but it's
encouraged uh up till now it was uh 24%
of the uh acreage they wanted to see
kept in open space and we have 23 now so
you know we we need to keep that money
rolling and they're saying by uh 2030
that they want 30% of open space per
town so um I I believe we should kept
that money in there it was already the
25,000 was already taken out and and it
was diminished into zero another thing
is you know everybody's crying about the
uh maintenance to everything and you
took money out of the
road and the building maintenance
so you
know I'm surprised you didn't take
something out of the tree fund but you
know how good we've been doing on the
trees you have to uh continue to
maintain everything in the town taking
money out is not going to help maintain
it Scott pan I think we still have you
Eric are we recording
still looks like we
are Scott I think you can unmute
it says mark that I cannot uh start the
video because it's disabled yeah video
is disabled but uh you can probably
speak yeah right so you
know that's my two cents Mark okay all
right thank
you
um moving on I want to make sure I
didn't lose anybody looks like my screen
readjusted
uh Chris Eric did you want to contribute
anything no thank you I'm just here
listening thank you though okay thank
you an CR
looks like you're unmuted
an H we're not hearing you if you're if
you're
speaking tell you what I'll uh come back
to you a little
later might be able to put something in
the chat if you you want uh Wall-E owner
it
says nothing at this time mark thank you
okay thank you uh Valerie
berau hi Mark
um it pops up on your screen by the way
once you try to unmute yourself for a
participant it then pops up on the
screen to ask to be unmuted so that
might be the problem if people aren't
looking at their screen um is they have
to ask to be unmuted on the mode that
we're we're we're currently in um the
only thing I will say to Jesse and
anybody else that did still have
questions about the school budget by all
means um I absolutely am available at
the office if anybody has any questions
between now and next week please reach
out via email or by phone and I'll be
happy to answer them for you thank
you okay thanks Valerie uh I think I've
asked all the board of Finance members
uh to unmute so we should be should be
okay
there okay next up I have
Marcy
hi
um kind of getting over the last shock
of that video
um uh I wanted to find out I couldn't
tell by the budget how much of the money
that we get comes from the federal
government um the reason why I asked
about this is you guys I'm sure you know
what's going on and I think we should be
careful to think about how much funds
could be potentially cut off from our
budget and the last thing we want to do
is ask Town's people for more money
because the federal government is not
paying what they normally
do okay um the second thing I want to
address is I'm kind of surprised that
you take the board of education budget
and you just slip it through and send it
to the
town from what I understand you could
recommend that they use some fiscal
restraint and ask them to reduce their
their
budget by a certain amount of money you
can't tell them where to spend it but
I'm pretty sure you can tell them they
need to keep it in line um thank you I
feel like a increase of almost 9% is
irresponsible uh it's pretty high and
they've been having you know High
budgets for many years
and I think that it's uh important that
we that the board of Finance
helps the town's people in this regard
because you know how it is when we get
to a town meeting we can't do much all I
got Mark are you gonna respond to that
or do you um yeah I'll uh if you're all
set Mary thanks yeah I mean the the
there's a couple things I I don't know
about the the first question so the how
much of our revenues are actually uh
come from the state from the federal
government I think actually very few
there might be some grants that we're
looking for uh there may be more that
comes indirectly from the federal
government certainly certainly uh you
know we most of our money comes directly
from the state including a lot of our
our grants um I don't see Eric on oh
yeah he is on Eric so you I don't know
if you have anything to add to that if
you know more than I do specifically
about where the origin of those grants
comes
from sure so the answer is the only
thing that we're getting at this very
second that is that is very definitely
Federal money is the bridge replacement
Grant um which is a project that is
ongoing right now and it's certainly a
concern of
ours um
supposedly that is
protected that's what the state do is
telling me but it's certainly something
I'm nervous about
um that's
roughly $3.2 million project that's
already started so I don't think it's a
project we can just
terminate
um you know other than that most of the
money
that the town gets ECS is the primary
source is as far as I know that is State
taxpayer funded there's not federal
dollars in that so the vast majority of
money that the town gets from the state
um comes from you know Town
taxation uh do I think we can count on
them restoring the cuts in
ECS no given how many polls in the
state's budget I don't think that's
something we can guarantee which we
could in years past but that's already
baked into the budget
so you know other than that you know it
there's no question that a fair amount
of the state money that's out there is
actually originates from the federal
government but we just don't really
necessarily even know what the town
level what that is so it's it's hard to
say what what are uh exposure is but I
don't think it's that high other than
the federal local Bridge Project which
is going on now which is the Bunker Hill
Bridge
replacement okay all right thanks Eric
um Liz you have your hand up it looks
like did you want to
comment yes I do want to well I just
wanted to comment to say that uh people
are not able to contribute to the chat
it's disabled probably because of the
way the meeting is and if I or anybody
goes you know puts their mute on we
can't get back in we can't unmute again
so that's all I wanted to say yeah so if
you can raise your hand i'm trying to
make sure the board of Finance members
remain unmuted so yeah you may want may
want to stay unmuted if you can so yeah
yeah all right you can finish answering
Marcy go ahead okay thanks yeah and so
uh to get back to the second question
that that Marcy asked about the about
the board of Finance role with the
education budget um it is true that we
can comment and make recommendations on
the budget um you know we do we do have
a presentation typically um from the uh
superintendent Board of Ed um you know
sometimes people have comments sometimes
they don't we don't tend to make a
general comment I think we all agree
that 8% is a difficult uh number uh for
sure but generally we're going to leave
it to the town this is really the town
budget the town meeting is designed
around that and of course the Board of
Ed it's their primary role they should
be um you know also exercising of course
appropriate restraint and and what you
know they feel is appropriate for the
for the town and hopefully they are um
so the the uh you know just to read from
the charter just said directly the board
of Finance may add to delete from or
eliminate requests made by various
departments offices and agencies except
that the board may only comment and make
recommendations on the budget requests
of the local Board of Education so um
there's some you
know there's some nuances of course to
that but that's that is what the charter
says uh Bill did you want to comment
well I would just encourage Marcy to
talk to Valerie if she has questions
Valerie did a great job of explaining
where those increases come from and
mostly um what we are told is the the
student population has increased quite a
bit they have two classrooms I believe
that are up to 27 students a piece and
by state mandate I believe Mark and you
correct me we have to hire two new
teachers is what we were told uh based
on those two classrooms reaching their
maximum size so a large part of what I
understood from Valerie and The Bard
ofed was the two new teachers that were
here mandated to hire um because of
classroom enrollment so it's not like
they're just spending a lot of money you
know willy-nilly I think they're just
doing what they have to do to you know
meet state
requirements but again talk to Valerie
about that Marcy because she would be
able to better probably better direct of
the board of that yeah because there's
some there's some nuances there I'm sure
Beyond
us okay um next on my list I have lean
Hutcherson you should be unmuted lean if
you want to add
anything Mark she usually talks through
a phone number too I'm thinking it's the
3475 I I could be wrong but if you see
that you might I'll try it I'm not sure
that they can unmute from the phone oh
that's true right you have to do some
kind of there's some uh yeah
some there she go see we got it is that
jul can you it is yeah okay good gotcha
thank
you yes um thank you for the overview
and I real realized that I have not um
or I realized that I haven't gone in and
looked at the um everything in a lot of
detail including the Board of Ed budget
my question was along the lines of what
just came up and um some of what bill
joser just mentioned um what is the
regarding class sizes um bill just
mentioned two classes with 27 people so
now I I think I have a two-part question
I was going to ask what the current
average class size is and what the class
average class size would be if the um
number of teachers that the the board of
education is requesting are hired and
then um I guess the second part of my
question is according to what bill just
said um how does the state come in and
mandate how many teachers we have to
have I think Valerie's on the call if
she yeah I mean you know Valerie I'm
gonna unmute you I I would again just
I'm sure these questionss been answered
but I'm not really sure uh that you
we're certainly not
the authority
here um sure Mark so two things first of
all again I don't want to hijack your
meeting I absolutely will answer the
questions and then urge anybody who
would love to sit down with me to please
give me a call I have sat down with a
few people by phone and in person um yes
most of what Bill said Is Right on the
The Mark there is that um we can't have
30 there's 36 current third graders we
have one fourth grade class so right
there that's that's a class right there
there are in addition to those 36 kids
that need to have two classes next year
in addition to that we also have um
class sizes above fourth grade that are
currently at 27 and 28 with no new
registrations for next year um and
that's all of our kids in that class
this is not taking into consideration
any special um circumstances or needs of
particular kids and um again I don't
want to take over your meeting here but
um I've always said it also depends on
the students when someone says well how
many kids are in this class how many
kids are in that class um it depends on
the needs of the students and recently I
actually just used an analogy that you
can't just say let's count the number of
kids and let's count the number of
teachers um we have to look and that's
why a lot of what we did as a board of
education
um in planning this budget had to do
with specificity to other mandates like
special education needs and I say that
because I know that there is I believe
57 or 58 streets in the town of Andover
and we have five people who work for
Public Works how silly would it be if I
said well we're just going to divide the
number of streets by the number of
public um Works guys and they each have
11.4 streets and so there you go that
number sounds great that five guys
should each be able to take care of 11.4
streets that would be silly on my part
if I said that because Eric would be the
first one in rightfully so to say Val do
you have any idea how big certain
streets are versus other streets and the
needs and this and that so it's not a
one toone comparison and I would really
love to just remind people of that but
Bill is exactly right that we do have
too many kids for um the current upper
grade classes because unfortunately when
the enrollment went down years ago that
was the way that they balanced that
budget down to the zero and less than
zero increases that they had gotten for
a few years was through the reduction of
Staff alone and they were able to do
that many years ago we just aren't able
to do that now with our increases so
this unfortunately is that year um and
it'll it'll you know definitely be a
little bit difficult for people however
um this has got to be that year last
year I know we had 16% on the side and
people weren't happy but it was a
necessity and this year unfortunately it
is the necessity for the school side so
thank you and again I'm still open to
anybody giving me a call um and um or an
email and I would be glad to sit down
with anybody thank
you thank you
Valerie hey Mark be yeah before we move
on I just wanted to kind there's been so
much um talk about the open space that I
feel like I need to address it for the
people that are here I want them to know
that be obviously this is a painstaking
process you know everybody could come on
and have their you know thing that they
really their heart is into and I get it
and I think I even know most of you on
here and what you would you know
everybody wants to keep everything in
every budget line but we you know we
came on this on this committee or you
know we were elected to to do a job so I
want you to know that we do put a lot of
effort into it the questions we asked
Jad and Scott about the um open space
was and I also want you all to know
there's there's an account that has
grown so just because we might have cut
a certain budget a certain year there's
a ballooned amount that is in those
accounts that we study so when I touched
or when I made the motion I put my name
and face behind the cuts that I put out
there I'm the one that asked about the
the streets because we had about a
million dollars that was going to be in
that fund we didn't take anything down
to zero the questions we asked about
open space were was there anything on
the agenda that was coming up because we
had a sizable amount in there and then
if something is found luckily we have a
contingency fund we have a surplus fund
and I forget if I'm calling the
unexpended fund balance I think is the
more correct term that anyone could
maybe petition to Eric and try to to get
something funded so again it's not easy
and we thank you for all these
comments what are you talking
about
Eric okay um anything else from the
board
members okay it looks like I have one
more uh person that's Mary holler
no comment just listening thanks okay
thank you
Mary okay I guess I I'll just open it up
a little bit if there's any member of
the public that has anything additional
they want to add I think you can raise
your hand using the zoom function uh if
you want to add anything
additional give you a minute
here uh Jeff Bor here yeah are you in
the community room Jeff
he is okay I'm sorry
Jeff they're muting again or it's
getting muted
Eric I I didn't mute him Mark can you
unmute yeah yeah I can't unmute but I
can request can you hear me now yeah we
can hear you now y okay um I I just came
down from the Andover Community Garden
meeting and uh they suggest I'd be here
to answer any specific questions about
the garden budget i'
forwarded um information as to the one
time this year and what that was going
for and what our projected budgets in
the future were as well as uh articles
that were run in the River East by
myself that would give uh Board of
finance and a better understanding of
where we come from our history and our
accomplishments okay um so that uh I
think that Lise had forwarded that
information Lise yep that's what I was
going to say and in the meeting um in
the meeting that's going to be following
will probably be okay so in the
subsequent meeting we'll discuss that
yeah thank you Jeff y
okay and an cre you have your hand up
I think you're unmuted now an we're not
hearing you and if you are
talking give me a
imposter oh she's still there yeah and
we still see you with your hand up
you're unmuted I think if you want to
add anything
yeah we're not hearing
anything
yeah we were able to hear her previously
right
so did she just go off oh There She is
again yeah she kind of moving around
yeah okay well um I guess at this point
we can consider that we've uh taken the
public comment um a lot of good
questions lot of good questions about
the process um and good input from
everybody we appreciate the attention we
know it's a lot um we all have busy
lives and uh for you folks to follow up
and and be evolved it's uh it's
appreciated this is how it works so
thanks very much
um so Board of Finance members we can
entertain a motion to adjourn the
meeting or close the public
hearing make a motion to close the
public hearing during the meeting I'll
second okay Kim second yeah uh any
discussion bill you got your hand
up no I I lower it now um no I'm in
favor of also okay moving on yeah
discussion I'm just gonna once again
thank you everybody
um you know for taking the time being an
active member of the community we really
like to hear all opinions about
everything so thank you thank you for
knowing our meeting was tonight and for
for coming
aboard okay Board of Finance members uh
all those in favor of closing the public
hearing say I I I
opposed any extensions
okay uh motion passes unanimously
meeting is still open we have a need to
entertain a separate motion to adjourn
uh unless the board has any other
further
comment are you talking to us now Mark I
am are you trying to end the meeting are
we going or well then we close the
public comment section uh if you look at
the agenda there's like two one one is
to close the the continue close the
public comment section and the next
would be to adjourn the
meeting to adjourn the public hearing
yeah public hearing yes and we're moving
on to our special meeting right okay
thank you just making sure the way you
said it it sound like we're just done
for the night yeah no no no okay so
lucky okay we're gonna stay on though
We're Not Gonna close it of Finance
members and anybody else who chooses to
can stay on for the subsequent meeting
thank you yeah I still need a motion to
adjourn the public uh
hearing I thought we just did that I
thought we just we closed a public
comment we need to close the hearing oh
it's the way it's written in the in the
agenda okay okay point of parliamentary
procedure that's why I was confused yeah
I'll make a motion to close the public
okay thank you Lise that was Kim yes it
was okay thank you any
discussion okay all those in favor say I
I any opposed any extensions
okay the meeting is adjourned thank you
again everybody we will be reopening
another meeting this will be a special
meeting with the board of Finance to uh
uh continue the discussion uh on the
budget based on the uh public comment um
and if necessary we'll also hold another
meeting tomorrow to uh continue to
discuss and uh work on the uh final
budget to be recommended for the town uh
next week and next week's meeting hope
you all come to next week's meeting uh
Wednesday 7M in person at Town actually
in the school community school gymnasium
so thank you very much for attending
feel free to stay on if you
like Board of Finance members does
anybody need a
break nope okay then we will uh we'll go
ahead and now call to order the special
meeting this is the special meeting for
the town of Andover Board of Finance on
Wednesday April 2nd 2025
um we'll s recite the Pledge of
Allegiance a pledge allegiance to the
flag of the United States of America and
to the
Republic stands one
Nace that's thank
you okay we actually have another uh
agenda item the first part of this
meeting agenda is also public speak so
if any members of the public uh would uh
would like contribute again I think
probably just best to go around and ask
um first on my list here is Scott pan do
you have anything to
add no I'm good mark thank you okay
thank
you uh Diane
Grenier I'm all set thank you okay thank
you uh Jed
Larsson I'm all said thanks okay thank
you
Carol all set for now thanks okay thank
you uh
Jesse uh hi this is Jesse pan and no I
don't have anything
further okay thank you thank
you uh Chris ER
col hopefully I'm saying that right
Chris
anything okay we'll move on to Valerie
Bruno I'm all set thank you Mark okay
and uh
Marcy I no
thanks okay thank you uh Leanne
Hutchinson nothing thank you okay and
and Mary
holler nothing to add thanks
okay all right thank you very much
everybody um okay those of you who
aren't on the board of Finance uh or the
town if you if you could uh uh mute
yourself I'm sorry is there anybody in
the community and over community room
that would like to uh make any comments
before we start no I'm all set okay
thank you
okay so Board of Finance members um as
you know our next uh item is to continue
the discussion on the uh
budget so I will go ahead and
uh share the
budget okay as all of you know we worked
uh pretty hard on this last week uh and
the week before and week before um a lot
of uh a lot of work went into this um
and I think we're we're fairly aligned
uh so I guess I'll leave this open to
the board of Finance members would
anybody like to uh make any have any
discussion about any specific line items
that we haven't um haven't already
settled on or anything we have settled
on you want to add more bill I guess I
would just start off by saying that you
know some of the cuts that the people
talked about that came on um generally
speaking the open space fund and of
course the the software for the
community center these were decisions
that were easily made um they were
painful for myself I believe that we
should have both of those funded this
year what the board of Finance was
trying to do uh was trying to trim a
budget back that was looking at a I
think at the time a a two Mill increase
I get the exact percentage of dollars
and all that so it was just again the
board of Finance trying to in in a tough
year to um hold spending back where we
thought we could could um based on the
number of uh people that talked about
the open space fund I guess um I would
make a motion that we would do some
small amount just to keep something in
that fund maybe $10,000 so it doesn't go
to zero you want to give me a number
10,000 is what I just said um so um I
would make a motion that we add $10,000
back into the open space fund um just so
again that it doesn't go to zero and
disappear off our radar you know going
full so that would be my only comment
right now I'd like to second that okay
that was Louise correct yes okay thank
you um I think the motion is before the
board of Finance to add $10,000 back
into the open space fund uh
discussion uh I would just say you know
I I think I oppose the the cut that we
made last week so I'm obviously in favor
of putting money back in I I'm not sure
what the the the material difference
between 10 and 25 really is but uh yeah
I'll support this
motion yeah and Mark I just want to add
that there's no way we're going to
forget what we cut like I'm going to
remember every single thing and we're
going to remember that we had such a
budget year that we asked the question
of what you know if there was anything
on the horizon I believe the the total
in that fund right now is over 300,000
so we've got a good pot of money in
there
um so I'm going to oppose it just
because it was painful at the beginning
we have to cut somewhere there's no way
this budget was going to pass in my
opinion I mean unless you know we have
3,000 residents and a lot of senior
citizens and different things so I'm
just trying to be responsible for
everyone um yeah that's my only thing
but we're not going to forget because
we're going to remember what I mean I've
taken good notes um yeah my opinion it
was
hard okay Bill and Louise you both have
your hands up still are you oh sorry add
or is that sorry yeah I have a question
um I'd like to discuss the uh community
garden budget um I okay can we have a
motion before us now on the open space
fund we should vote on that first okay
so any more discussion on the open space
fund I just like to add that I I do
agree with bill it was hard um but I
think it's great to put the $10,000 back
I I think it's
fine
okay there's any comment before we go on
yeah I don't I don't have a problem with
$10,000 I think um we did our best to
try to make little Cuts here and there
and it wasn't a huge amount to begin
with um I think
just you know so it can add a compound a
little from the previous year years I'm
not I'm not terribly opposed to that um
not a hill I would die
on I think we've heard from everybody I
think we heard from Robert already yeah
um so I'll just for for the record State
I think it's too low I personally would
rather see it go to at least 25k but
uh I understand where we are and
uh so I'd support it also any further
discussion okay hearing none I'll vote
all those in favor say I
I any
opposed is anyone
abstaining Joan Joan you're opposed I
think it makes common sense and I know
we have funds to to pull from if so yes
um I'm opposed at this time okay and any
abstentions okay hearing none the motion
passes
so just to take a look at the impact on
the bottom line you know it's kind of as
as mentioned it's it's it's fairly
minimal um it increases the total by
taxation 2.1% so it's U it's at 10,000
me it's it's a tenth of a
percent okay uh further discussions on
the uh on the budget so you wanted to
talk about the community garden yeah
while while Jeff is on the line we
submitted every Jeff submitted it to me
I submitted it to everybody uh because
they had some
further comments and questions on it and
it's pretty
self-explanatory did anybody have any
questions yeah yeah I have a question
for Jeff um because I um can you hear me
yeah yes yes um yeah so I went on to the
community garden uh uh Facebook page and
it was quite impressive um it looks
beautiful and I I saw that there was
quite a an irrigation system in there
already so I'm curious about why you're
asking for more stuff for more
irrigation could you maybe explain that
uh if I can get myself unmuted here
somehow can hear you can hear you okay
um yes um we have a 17 the capacity is
1700 gallon rainwater collection for our
irrigation system the irrigation system
is complete what we are missing at this
point is the pump which is in this
year's budget at
$1,800 and but still won't get us a
functional irrigation system until we
get electricity to The Shed from the
Culver in front of the shed whenever
they run the uh wire for the upgraded um
uh generator behind the
firehouse oh do we know when when that's
going to
happen
anybody so while that question we did
not get the federal funding that we
requested so I would say I have no idea
sometime in the next 10
years okay I have another question for
you um
and I heard this from the board of
selectman so that's why I'm asking um
that at one time and I saw this on the
Facebook page um thousands or hundreds
of pounds of uh vegetables had been
being donated to the Andover food pantry
is that something that you guys still do
is that still the plan or what is the
plan for that well um in the past couple
years um I have been doing Mo a a major
major part of the work without a lot of
volunteer help um and so I approached
the pantry this year and because we had
uh two and a half beds to The Pantry we
delivered um over a th000 pounds of
fresh produce uh this last year and
they're stretched thin for volunteers
and said that they could not find
anybody to volunteer to tend the beds
and so at that point um we decided that
we were going to divide the beds up in
half so that we could offer uh beds to
uh resident families uh to to attend
their own beds and be responsible for
their own beds and any of the Surplus
we'll be going to the food pantry I have
as it stands now I have two half beds
myself and I donate 80% 85% of my
produce to The Pantry um so we're hoping
that it won't be 1,000 pounds but we're
hoping to make a a major um contribution
to Fresh Produce to The Pantry this
coming
year thank you thank
you any other
questions okay um you know Eric I just
wanted to clarify I was looking at the
notes and I can't remember from the
discussion the notes says the board of
selectman reduce the line from fourth up
$46,000 clearly that wasn't the
request you're muted
Eric that was the original request the
original Rec commission request was for
$40,000 for upgrades to the uh the
basketball back stops in the
gymnasium oh under under wck programs
I'm sorry uh so the community garden I
guess I was getting that confused I'm
sorry my
mistake so I guess my question would be
if we buy this pump this year um there's
no guarantee or idea when it would be
electrified so we could spend the money
but not actually get electricity for
anytime in the near future is that true
that that is correct um as far as I know
um the reason I put it in was to get the
system completed so all we are waiting
for is the
power okay
thanks further discussion or questions
from the board of Finance or anybody
want to made a commotion you could also
do that of course are we talking about
just this this item right well it would
now would be the time relevant to ask
any questions or discussion around the
community garden line if y yep thank
you but if there is none I propose we
move
on by proposing to move on that's means
that particular line item is as it is is
that correct it's as it is right now
yeah okay thank
you okay other line items that the board
of Finance would like to
discuss yes Mark I have a couple this is
Joanne um so as you guys know I've
talked about a couple things in
different public meetings
and maybe the board you know I've sent
you some information of the background
of things that won't be discussed here
but kind of along those lines and Eric
was nice enough to supply some
background too um i' I've made it known
publicly that now that we have a senior
center
director um I think it would be a great
idea that we um move some of the duties
that are paid um under a stien for the
Social Services Comm uh I think it's
called The Social Services um
coordinator you can find it in a couple
items in the budget you know it'll be
under an employees additional pay and
then it's also under senior citizen um
this particular thing and obviously
we're talking about next year so this
person would still retain the rest of
the D ities for the rest of this year
were in March so that's plenty of notice
for that to go away um I know I also was
taking into account in our budget
documents that um Eric had provided I
didn't know this was in existence but
there was an memorandum of an agreement
signed about this
position and it was signed the last one
we have was signed in 2020 you know July
of 20 wait a minute August 1st
2022 so so we are within our rights to
take away this stien now because the
agreement says that we are allowed to
terminate it as long as the there's 30
days of written notice and again it's a
big long thing but
um I think and according to this mou
I'll call it memorandum of agreement or
the person you know is not to give more
than six hours of time to it I believe
and our Charter also says that this type
of position should be an unpaid
volunteer which we've discussed before
so without further Ado with that little
bit of background um because this
stien now that we have a senior center
director who can act in essence as the
municipal agent for the elderly um a
perfect spot for these duties to go we
have both a senior center director we
have a senior center assistant director
I know that by Charter we have to have
this person um someone to do these
duties but luckily we're a town of 3,000
people I'm giving everyone in the
background that's listening so it's not
a very busy position I would say so I
think we could save the town
$7,500 next year not this year um with
this stip in because it's up to like
$6,100 and it's also collecting
murf um so to the tune of about 7,400 so
I would like to entertain a motion to
eliminate this stip in from next year's
budget which which which accounts are we
talking about Joan So I think you're
gonna find the dollar under the senior
citizen if you go down to senior
citizens it's probably documented
under Social Services yep so see it's
always been under the senior center but
the res res services coordinator
line you know we've had this person that
took it over it was great we're so
thankful it was paid in the you know as
a
stipend um but again I work in a place
where stiens come and stiens go every
year depending on need and my sale here
for the town to save this money is we
now have a senior center
community
director in every other Town their
senior center director Community Center
Director acts as this agent for the
elderly and over kind of whips it up
into this trying to call it a couple
different names because people weren't
aware that this was what it was so again
having done a lot of research having
talked to other Senior Center directors
who are all Municipal agents of the
elderly I think it's the perfect time
for and over to make the change and
while doing that we can save this line
of $7,500 of course this person doing it
thank you thank you thank you you will
continue doing it through June that's my
speech so if if I could summarize what
you're actually making the motion for so
you're you're Mo you're making the
motion to zero out the uh the amount the
proposed budget for this line item
145-00 uh 5100 resident services
coordinator correct you know for for
next budget year thank you does anybody
second that motion okay I have a
question on that let's let's look for a
second first Louise if anybody has a
second all
right I'll second
it okay can you're gonna second it okay
yes well because the position is already
listed as
a um unpaid position in our Charter I'm
going to support that that change I do
appreciate the person that's been doing
it
though okay uh Louise did you have a you
had a comment or question yeah I mean
would it be a two-part motion um saying
to to zero out that money but to direct
that responsibility to a certain person
we can't direct the responsibility
that's the job of the board of selectman
yeah I did the research to find out how
other towns handle the financial part
yeah that's but that's on the that's up
to the board of Selectmen correct we
don't fund this they're going to have to
figure out how to get it done because it
is a required position I see okay thank
you any other comments in the board of
board of Finance so um I guess I would
ask Eric because I really don't
know much about what test actually I'm
sorry what the director or the assistant
director does do they have the capacity
to take on that role because I believe
that's what Joan was really alluding to
was having that role be passed down to
either the director or the assistant
director role so I guess I'm just
wondering what the capacity is for that
either either one of those positions to
take on that that role Eric could you if
you could add any ins talk about that if
you'd like to sure so obviously as a
board of Finance you have the right to
zero out any line item you want
um and then ultimately it's the board of
Selectmen and my job to figure out how
to get the things that that person does
accomplished um are we going to be able
to shift that
to the uh director of the senior center
absolutely not um you know she's way
overworked as it is um it's already a
full-time position adding those tasks
onto it I I believe that's a non-starter
because that means we're cutting too
many other programs that she administers
because there just isn't enough time as
it is this week we submitted one of the
two grants for senior transportation
that we should have because we ran out
of time submitting the other one that
other one potentially would have been 12
to1 15,000 back to the town but we
honestly didn't have the bandwidth to
put out two grants in that period of
time so no and nor if you think about
what the resident services coordinator
does can I can I interrupt just I would
like you to let him finish speaking
Joanne he's he's trying let Eric finish
let's let him finish speaking before I
was only gonna ask him a question about
that no no problem guys no problem so
and and honestly I really don't want to
distract a resident or the senior center
director dealing with reporting
situations and a bunch of the other
things that the resident services
coordinator does you are correct in that
the one position that the state
mandates that the town
has um the town Charter does say that is
a volunteer position the town did that
years ago in response to the state you
know passing another unfunded mandate on
the towns and requiring the towns do
have that um you know going back five
years we had a a separate person that
was doing the tasks for the resident
service what we're now calling the
resident services
coordinator
um when that person was fired by the
town we made a decision to assign that
for duties to the
uh assistant assessor in part because
the assistant assessor was the best
person to be dealing with the renters
rebates which is one of the things that
position coordinates anyway um because
she already works in the agency that
kind of oversees the renters rebates so
from my perspective right now what we
have is a good fit for the
position um you know but again it's it's
your call you can certainly zero it out
if you so
choose I don't know how we would would
go about filling that but it's not going
to be the senior center
director Joan you had a question thank
you so much Mark I definitely didn't
want to interrupt I want Eric to to say
everything that they want to hear I just
wanted to let the board know that I
spent my whole Sunday sending you all
emails with a whole bunch of information
um of how I have been trying to you know
present this and I've talked about it in
meetings and stuff so I hope you took
the time to to read it um because it I
wanted you to thoroughly have the
background so that you would be prepared
and know what why I was asking for this
um and I get that everyone's vision for
a per a position is going and I respect
everyone so much that's why if I'm going
to say something or ask Eric a question
I'm definitely going to you know present
the strong points of something too none
of this is easy it's it's not not
personal at all it's it's trying to come
up with some savings and then doing a
heck of a lot of research on what other
towns do so um it's never easy doing
things like this and so that's why I
sent you guys all that prep information
so you would know for our additional
meetings coming up but it kind of came
together with this this is something we
had to take care of at this meeting and
I don't mind if Eric's vision for or Our
Town Administrator I should say vision
for what a senior center community
center person should be as you all
remember we had wanted it to be a
full-time job anyways and that's that's
something that'll be discussed down the
line but I think that they do slant more
to wanting the grant writing and
everything while every other town which
I've spoken to many many of these Senior
Center they're all the municipal agent
for the elderly and I would have thought
that was a no-brainer coming in I think
maybe our town had a little bit of a you
know we're a Tiny Town as I like to call
it but we had a different vision for
that so again he just had a different
vision for it but I thought this was a
great place to get some cost savings
there since we now have an additional
person so and also allowing for this
person to serve out the term go with
everything in the charter um not ruining
anything that's already put in place and
giving a lot of advanced notice so
that's all Liz you get your hand up yeah
um so I I I support this motion and the
reason I do is um well first of all as
Joanne mentioned uh the board of Finance
did authorize this as a full-time phys
last year um no this this a different
position we're talking about right no no
no I'm talking about you're talking
about this okay the senior center
position was was authorized but it
turned out not to be anyway but my
understanding is that um we don't even
have to deal with hoarding situations
here it's usually just referred to
Eastern Highlands
Health that's how that is that that's my
understanding from my research um and
that renters rebates are generally have
been handled by the assistant assessor
assessors in the past um so I don't know
however they want to figure out how to
deal with this it sounds like it's
minimal very minimal hours um
and I'm in favor
of saving the money on the
stien other comments or questions to the
board of
Finance okay
um you know I'm just going to say I will
vote against it I I think it's a little
risky for us to to to be eliminating
funding for a position that is is
mandated um you know we've heard that um
it's wouldn't be easy to you know
redistribute this activity I think we
probably get a bargain for the money we
spend on this uh but that's that's my
two cents if uh if none of the other
members of the board of Finance have any
input um we'll go ahead and call for a
vote okay and we may need to do this
individually so I want to make sure I
get it correctly so I'm GNA I'm going to
go in order my screen uh
Bill
no uh
Liz
I okay uh Joanne I okay
um Louise I abstain from
this okay
Kim
yes okay Robert
nay okay so we have a tie I'm going to
vote
no he
um the motion doesn't pass if we don't
have a
majority so at this point we'll consider
the motion to not have passed I'd like
to make another motion
please okay is that you
Joanne when you're when you're done yep
go ahead so with that motion not passing
I'd like to amend well I'd like to
introduce another emotion to have this
stien be funded at the amount
of2
400 okay anybody want to second that
this typ in please yes I'll second
it uh was that you list like yeah I'll
second it because my understanding is
that it is there are so minimal hours
ever needed for this position for what I
understand so for someone who is in a
position who's already getting paid that
will be taking these same calls will be
taking calls during current work hour as
my understanding
um it it just uh doesn't okay if it was
something that she had to handle
separately as a part-time you know like
after hours then absolutely I would
totally support the funding but it's
something that happens during the day
during the work days and the the time
that that is affected for this role is
very
minimal uh as far as as I've been uh
what I've learned in my research okay so
uh just to regroup and make that clear
so the the uh motion before the board is
to fund this position at
$2,400 annually uh as stien uh further
discussion from the board members yeah I
just want to say that thank you guys for
we've talked about this before where all
those points have been brought up
remember when you have a stip in you're
not usually double dipping but but this
stapen is allowed to double dip so she
doesn't have to increase her hours it is
you know with all the research it's
minimal work um and this would give
money to that person of $200 a month I
think if they're going to keep that
stapen in there I think that's a fair
amount of getting you know a little bump
to do the extra
work okay further discussion from the
board Mark can I make one point uh sure
Eric so right
now centry has the same
position that the assistant assessor
holds as the assistant assessor that
pays $7 an hour more than what we pay
and gives a bonus or a bump in salary as
soon as that person completes the six
Monon probationary period
um you know you're kind of playing with
fire because what you're going to do can
I ask ped just because I don't
understand the longest serving person
left in the town hall um who is not paid
the going rate for her position personal
it's not another one available right
next door but you know you do have to
think about that if you're going to make
that decision
okay that's it taken okay Mark I just
want clarification on procedure yep so
once the board of Finance members that
are volunteers here giving their time
have made a motion and we're in the
discussion mode are we allowed to
have you know I thought that we were
talking about it amongst we ask your
questions in M motions all the time and
I know but we didn't that time we did
not ask for additional information feel
like it it's fine but I I just feel like
we have a two-way street sometimes and
I'm just trying to learn all the rules
thank
you anything else from the board of
Finance
members yeah I just wanted to remind as
well that um the charter does say it is
an unpa
uncompensated position and and also um
the town of centry is four times the
size they
also they have a a ginormous budget
um I I know I know it well my son is
dealing with it and arguing with them
right now so um they have a huge budget
they have a large population um much
bigger than
us it's really not personal too it's
really hard when we we try to keep the
person out of it because this is not
easy work to do this is not easy work to
do you know making all these calls
making sure my facts are right making
sure that I'm going to going to present
myself in a professional way and then
have to get this information out where
you know it's not easy but you're trying
to save the taxpayers a little bit of
money because we did add other people
and then we get this
back you know from a source that I
wouldn't think would be going in that
direction that's all we we've got to
keep the personal out of it we're trying
to yeah of course just save the town
some money if I have come up you know
all of us Whoever has done some research
on the side or taken the time to read my
emails and the hours that were put into
it um you know it's not off the cuff
thank you I have a question support of
Finance members Louise yeah a question
um is it all possible to look at the
possibility of maybe paying that person
per
hour again I think we're straying into
territory that is a little bit outside
of our purview you we can fund the
budget we can make a recommendation that
the budget line items be funded at
particular areas and therefore obviously
we're influencing policy when we do that
but I don't think we can I don't think
we can do anything really directing or
requesting I mean you can you can go to
board of selectman meeting and ask that
they make a change but they're really
the ones that would need to make that
change I think okay
understood that makes sense yeah yeah it
does
one more question yeah let me ask one
more I'm
sorry go ahead Liz like you got up there
yeah I was I was gonna ask Eric um did
he
disappear I'm here oh there he is okay
um you popped over on a different screen
um do you have a
um a log uh I mean is there a log that
shows the number of calls and the you
know that H is having to be dealt with
to maybe support that a little
more do I have an exact number of people
that request Services no I don't um
nobody's ever asked me for it before so
that's not something you know and it is
a job that's very episodic
um you know the the problem comes in is
that in the
end what you're doing is you're
transferring the responsibility back for
running the hoarding task force and a
few other things back to me because
there is no other you know probably Town
employee that you're going to get to do
it and I will do that it's not like I'm
not going to do it
but you you know my time's pretty
valuable and I want to make it clear
that we're not we're not Personnel we're
not HR we are only the financial like
like I Mark Mark said so we we just are
looking for cost savings for the town
and did a little research to come up
with you know something so understood I
know Liz just asked that but you know I
get back to I've learned through my four
years on this board what I can talk
about and what I can't and I try to
really respect it um but this is just a
funding a simple funding saving the town
money you
know you know asking for all the data so
that we could support it um every single
one thing we can say is every single
town has in in marbor is the perfect one
if anyone saw the the River East a
couple weeks ago they had a great
article about this person that I
actually talked to and she came on board
she's a full-time person they have their
website that has all the resources you
pretty much direct someone to a website
or where to call you know is there a
call every day and and I'm not
pretending to know everything again as a
volunteer that spends a lot of time
trying to save the town money or or
offer some cost savings whether it gets
rejected or not um it was just an idea
but but usually there's there's websites
there's things like that this is a
fiscal thing it's not a personal thing
it's not a person thing
so back to the specific uh specific
motion are there there any more comments
or
questions remind me since we've been
talking about it for so long uh what the
figure for the motion was was it 2400
2,400 right say so just to be clear it's
like a $3,700 c from The Proposal
yes okay
understood thank you for
that one more question real quick does
this does this
also uh does does murf and other things
get added onto that amount as well
correct the total for the stien as it
sits is $
7400 that it's costing the town
currently so the murf would go down but
you know the 61 is the that's a good
good point Liz I don't know what the
total yeah yeah it's not just this line
level it's also right it affects yeah
that way okay I just wanted to because I
thought that was the case but I wanted
to
verify it's connected to the
murf
okay yeah it's connected to murf it's
connected the indirect costs and it's
also connected
to no it's not connected to healthcare
because that's already fully so those
two the the roughly
7% uh that the town pays in indirects
for Medicare Medicaid all that stuff
plus the the down contribution of murf
right and sorry just to follow up I
thought that the Moa said that it
shouldn't receive any other benefits but
again I'm not I'm not pulling hairs
right now just am looking at the
document but I'll keep the motion as
is further
discussion okay we'll take a vote all
those in favor say
I hi hi hi Liz
Joanne and um Kim did I lose Kim okay
where you
okay and I'm sorry I should have in
order just make it clear Bill
no okay
Louise Louise you're
muted Luise you're
muted do you have to unmute her because
of the no I asked her to unmute it might
take a minute that to show up
we're just having a little bit more
technical difficulties than you
all Rob let just go to you
he okay I'm gonna vote no also so we
need Louise's
vote well right now it's a tie so it
wouldn't pass would it oh no I'm sorry
if she voted yes
right mind exactly it's all about the
question of
Ascension you sent her text I'm trying
to see if she's you did okay she said
she can't unmute oh should I should I
ask her for a vote or is that not
offal I mean we go
is boy
technology um I'm really on the fence
with this I'm gonna have to abstain on
this okay Louise abstains the motion
fails again or this motion fails I
should
say okay thanks everybody sorry about
the
delay okay um well we can entertain
additional motions or discussion of
other line items I have more I'm sure
people would want to hear from me again
um but I just want to bring up another
one that I think is a problem for the
town
so they can fix it I'm I'm trying
to um figure out where it is so
unfortunately this one is another
stipend and if you could you could go up
to the well this could be a very you
know a problem so the other one I had a
lot of backup on it so we're GNA I'm
sorry Mark can you go you'll have to go
to the top go to um kind of go where the
administrator is and we'll go down from
there and I'll find the
line okay all right and this one's very
very painful for me like if everyone
wanted to say how painful everything was
before because this is the hardest
worker that I know that I've come into
contact with but I think that this is
going against Union principles and I
don't think you can do this so um and if
someone wants to provide me with
something that says it is so it's under
the treasurer
Financial um tab of the 4137 accounts
we're looking at the
5100 the assistant Treasurer stien go
all the way over and let's look at the
reason
so I'm not talking about I clicked on it
but it's it says reesing additional ra
for siphon y this could mean a lot of
trouble for the town as far as
bargaining outside of the Union um
without having any kind of agreement and
without anybody else you you once
there's a Union contract and there's no
existing things you're not allowed to
bargain with one employee and if you
bargain with one employee
I mean I didn't plan you know it could
be serious trouble um I've looked into
this so
unfortunately for you know there's other
questions that are going to come into
play later I am looking to zero out for
the town that stien of $5,000 in that
line right
now showing the line I'm not seeing it
I'm not seeing the
line sorry go onk line I've highlighted
here it's 109 d101 Das
510000 assistant Treasurer
stien bargaining outside of
Union yeah so so that's Joanne's concern
you know we've talked about this uh in
other venues right but there's a whole
another thing that we're still going to
talk about but this one is separate from
that too but first I want to see if if
there is a second to this motion sorry y
I'll second it to for
discussion
okay um so other discussion
questions so this is this particular one
is this the one we've talked about
before yes
well Rob if I may there there's some
question about some other things you
know about published rates and stuff
like that we're not going into that now
this one it did come up
I mean we're looking at something that
clearly says what it's for on this
document right so this is what we're
going from yep no I just want to make
that I'm not confusing it's literally
just informational Jo I just want to
make sure that I'm not placing this
correctly in my mind you know this is
the one that we talked about fairly
extensively before is that
correct this particular one right but
there's more there's more to it than
just that so I it's hard but yeah I mean
this this particular one was talked
about a you know a little bit yeah right
and I I recall I mean I recall a
discussion and I you know I share your
concern thank you um I do not want our
town opened up to a
lawsuit um but the tricky bit here and
this is the thing that's that's that has
me all tied up is that
you know Board of
selectman should address this I we could
we could cut the funding
out I don't know if you know maybe that
solves the problem kind of in a indirect
way um that's the thing that's got me
kind of hung up but I I again I I would
reiterate that I share your concern I
don't think this is necessarily kosher
and we could be putting our
at risk or something I'd really hate to
see us have to deal with um
so I I I totally get what you're trying
to do here uh I don't know Mark is it
right for a
second let Rob finish Rob do you have
more no no I'll se it I'll seed my time
please by all means
Scott so you guys
remember Sor hold on stop everyone
please I can't see who's asking to to
speak
was that was that was me Scott Pon okay
all right Scott I'm going to give you a
couple minutes we got to get to this
point it's a pretty simple question and
I'm ass say it's the board of Finance
members too it's pretty straightforward
we discussed this at length out in
various venues so I I think I'd really
like to call the question but go ahead
Scott okay so this came up earlier in
one of our discussions in the board of
Selectmen that um Christine was going to
be taking over more responsibilities
from the treasurer
and that that was the reason why she was
going to get the extra money and when
the treasurer leaves Christine would be
there to to take over that
position so I I just want to give you a
little backstory on that that's all okay
thanks Mark if I could and I just want
everyone to know we have some matters
that will discuss in private that we're
not even bringing out right now I'm
clearly talking about just this
stipend is is not the way to go I I get
and as you guys know I I think she's
wonderful and probably worth every bit
of money that people want to give her I
just want the town to operate correctly
you can't just decide to do this that's
my opinion
yeah I'm only talking about yeah Paul
the
question okay yeah I mean
I'm just going to put in my two cents I
think removing this is is would be the
incorrect thing to do um you know it's
to the board of selectman to make the
proper uh finan and Eric to make the
proper you know financial and Personnel
decisions I think it's absolutely
incumbent upon this to raise issues
where we see potential problems um and
do you want me to public the other ones
hold on one at a time yeah so you know I
think we we've done that and we have
we're going to continue to do that
because it's important
uh but I don't want to tie anyone's
hands and you know this is not the final
budget you know this just gives us the
opportunity to move forward with this
budget we can always remove it later we
can remove it in the town meeting the
board of selectman can choose not to
fund it you know even though it's in the
thing doesn't mean they have to spend it
guys it's Joan again I just want to
reiterate there's a much bigger problem
than just this
sipen so I don't want you all to get
confused
with you know there's there's kind of a
couple issues this is the one I'm
publicly talking about okay so but I if
this is the way I hey I go with the
board I've done my thing my soul will be
clear with finding a
mistake um you know in thinking and
thinking this could be a problem and
operating outside of unions with doing
this if you don't if I know that it's
our charge to look at this spreadsheet
that we're given and decide what we want
to keep on it you know there's backup to
everything else that was provided this
one we don't have any backup and I'm
just looking at the reason that's there
and I I don't think it's a legitimate
reason especially when it's a union
employee if it was a non-union employee
I feel like there's a little more that's
all you've all said your piece I've said
my piece um my I'm clear I I did my
thing with bringing it forward
yeah I'd like to go ahead and call for a
vote if nobody's got anything different
or something they want to
add okay uh going down in order Bill no
Goan yeah based on what I just said yes
I'd like to remove it okay for the town
sake I would say yes because that would
force the issue to have the the over the
overall issue looked at from the word I
second okay
Rob um I'm going
obain okay
Liz Liz I'm
I'm I'm gonna vote Yes because I'm
concerned
about the um the bargaining part of it
that's true and if it's a concern uh
because of that I'm saying yes um
perhaps a conversation can happen with
the board of selectman later and get
that straightened out so we can know for
sure before the budget's finalized okay
just making the point that this can't be
funded if if we remove it and pass it
onto a toal for
Budget uh Kim I'm GNA vote
Yes okay okay and I will vote no so that
leaves four yeses two Nos and one
abstention so that motion passes so that
is this line right here and we will Zero
that out you're idiots okay thank you
everybody hey Mark I just have a
followup um just remember and then I did
send everybody an email I might as well
say it publicly we are requesting an
executive session with the board of
Selectmen at their next meeting so there
will be a few items discussed this was
just one I wanted to address today thank
you
okay other motions or line items to
discuss to the
board uh I just wanted to come back to
one thing I don't know that we sorted it
out uh after we talked about it in the
public hearing the money for the
software what where was that
uh for the I think was Senior Center
Software was like $4,000 was that
correct
uh oh 1200 you know I I don't know that
it was in our original thing it was
zeroed in the original estimate
here okay no maybe not so that was
zeroed
there okay I guess sorry I apologize I
be confused maybe getting a little tired
um I'll let it go never
mind okay any other items the board
wants to look
at Mark can we see where well I do have
some concerns with the spreadsheet this
is Joan again um and maybe Eric can
answer if he thinks that it's I don't
I'm hearing background noise is anyone
else hearing that I think
it's it's almost like a little B Dog you
know I think it's Louise if she could
mute
temporarily that would be great thank
you think got it thank you my goodness I
got it
okay um you know obviously I was gonna
ask where our bottom line was look at
the mill rate look at what it was but I
I thought of another line I wanted to
look at too um yeah so so the taxation
total is down to
2.0% which is where we started right I
think the mill rate might be might be
slightly like four point it's another 10
higher than I wrote it was like 32 point
and then can you go up Mark a little bit
because there's a total in the corner
that okay
so the spending is up this is the line
that I always look at in case the public
cares for this part is the 219 590 so
the expenses for this year from what
we've cut so far we will have an
increase of
219,000 I can't see it all but 590
something um
there so we also have the the thought um
when we get to if the point that anyone
else was going to make some suggestions
for cuts um that we could throw more of
the fund balance that Eric in Eric's
suggestion to bring things down just a
thought well I think we're at a 2%
increase with taxation um I mean I don't
see any reason to deplete our fund uh to
reduce that um we're well below the rate
of inflation um and
obviously um you know the the town's
people can
certainly speak uh right you know make
make motions to reduce things
but all right no I was just bringing
that up as a as a thought too because
well everything should be considered
yeah right so that's my personal view I
wouldn't change anything there right I
know he put the 40 you know I think we
were standard with 150 for a while and
he put the 190 there because last year
we were 40,000 over so I think he put it
back in for that yeah yeah that's just
kind of a one time thing right oh of
course of course oh you know what the
other thing I was wondering is where
where would we see the um The Returned
money from the sale of the um the
equipment the uh from the uh town the
town truck guys the what do you call
them DPW guys do is that is that
reflected in here anywhere uh if
anywhere it probably be in Revenue But
Eric I don't know we we probably aren't
going to show it separately unless un
you you have a net amount somewhere it's
not because it's it does not affect next
year's budget that would affect uh
essentially revenues in the last year's
budget okay so where did it go I guess
is my question goes into the general
fund
balance general fund balance okay is is
that a tab in here the general fund
balance no it is is
not because the general fund balance for
this budget we use a general fund
balance number that comes from the
previous audit so I gave you the cheat
sheet with which is what the uh
unexpended fund balance is as of the
financial statement that was relative to
July 1st
2024 so those
expenditures um presuming this year we
are uh under
budget um that would show up in the next
fiscal statement next year anything that
got returned to the general fund balance
from the sale of
equipment okay that doesn't show
up all right thank you thank you that
makes sense
okay would the board care to look at any
other line
items I had a question for Eric if I may
Mark sure go ahead um Eric I know I
learned a lot last week when we found
out that the fire department and um the
library I believe take care of their own
budgets and cut their checks do they um
and it's just if we could scroll down to
the library Mark just so that I
understand I might as
well because I think there's only one
line for the
library in
there there's two lines there's a salary
line and there's an operating budget yes
okay thank you right right so one
operating I it's getting blocked for me
for some reason there we go Library so
the library payroll is
self-explanatory and then Library
operations the proposed budget is very
similar to the year before do they
provide did they do they provide a
breakdown to you I know we asked the
same thing about the fire department so
I thought it was fair to ask about this
yes they do and that should have been
you should have had that that is in the
information that was in the shared gr
that you had access to I must have went
by because I went in there and I tried
to look at that all right just a
question so they cut their own check
they have a checkbook okay none of that
runs through your approval or
okay well what runs through my approval
is the
check um every quarter to the library
got it okay no I just want to make sure
I learn from this every year I get a
little bit more and then can we go up to
the fire department one more time
Mark uh yep hang on thank you yeah
must be going
down there's a fire department play
commission okay so and I know we went
over this last week and we talked okay I
just wanted to see the dollar amount so
that's
16785 or 150 167 350 350 yep my computer
screen is there we go
all righty
167 and then one more because I know
we're coming to the end but um if we
could go down to the public works again
I know that's one of our bigger
[Music]
budgets okay I just wanted
to there we go all right so it has all
the lines and then the bottom line
[Music]
there mark are we allowed to make a
motion um you know just on the bottom
line and then let a department decide
where they'd like to make any I don't
think that would be appropriate we we
you know I think we need to control the
budget line items at this point remember
they can always do an in in depart you
know Department transfer between
accounts if they if if if that's the
kind of thing you want them to be able
to do if you want them to decide and you
just want to take a number out well only
because I had tried to take you know and
again I'm only working in support of
what what I think is right so it's not
easy but I tried to make a motion and it
failed in a prior meeting when I was
trying to take a little so I thought
maybe it would be fair to try to just
take a little off the bottom line
whatever I would propose and then allow
them to decide that was my thought and
being a little more
um so let
me all right this is the last one from
me for the night I'm going to go ahead
and propose that we decrease the
supplies for public works by
2500 that's my
motion okay does anybody want to second
that motion that's uh account number
301- 620 56010
we have a
second guess I'm not hearing a second
that's
fine I just do my due diligence due
diligence thank you Mark
y well I guess at this point then I
would say unless somebody has an another
line item they want to take a look at
and address do somebody want to make a
motion uh to accept this budget as is as
the board of Finance recommended budget
to go to town
meeting ISO move can I I ask a question
well let's let's let's have the motion
Rob's got a motion on the thing do we
have a second I I
second okay Bill second disc go ahead
was that you Liz you're asking a
question yeah discussion
um so we have never discussed the AES
budget and that's been brought to our
attention I would like to to talk about
it um does accepting this preclude us
from talking about
it no so if I if we accept this we could
I'm able to talk about the AES budget
sure absolutely yeah okay you can talk
guess can't change anything can't do
anything about it hold on so yeah if you
want
to I guess change it in some way then
that more but just talking about it
absolutely
yeah um well I want to talk about it
because I thought we got a legal opinion
that we were allowed to make
recommendations to lower a bottom line
if we felt it was
appropriate right we don't have line
item Authority but we do have the
ability to say we think this should come
in
lower well we can I don't know that we
can cut it well we can suggest
it I would like to hear what Liz has to
say y oh I apologize I didn't mean to
cut in I apologize sorry it's okay it's
okay yeah
you
um so I know I was annoying everybody
earlier when I was on my fact finding
Mission and I appreciate everybody's
patience with all that um but
really I'm not not sitting on this board
to rubber stamp anything um and there's
really very little transparency in in
numbers and
information on the aeos website so I
tried to do do my best to gather
information and obviously was um faced
with some push back um so what I was
able to gather I gathered it on my own
um I've gone to other Town's websites
and found a whole lot more information
so much easier information to find and I
just feel like uh the town's people
don't have the information they need to
to know if they should even support the
budget or not um that being said
um I do have a couple things I wanted to
share um some images I wanted to share
that I had put together and if you guys
would indulge me um I'd like to send it
to Eric and then he could present it
you can you could also send it to me but
yeah oh or I could oh I could send it to
you okay
um you know I I I think I'm gonna I
don't
know does the board I mean
I
I okay I'm I'm gonna make a statement
it's just kind of a personal thing I uh
I am pretty am prettyy clear on what the
what the charter says so I would not be
at all comfortable with changing the
thing because it's clear that the
charter says that we can't change the
board of education budget just comment
on it so you know I wouldn't go to
change it I've got to get up very very
early for a flight like three in the
morning so what I would prefer that we
do and I'm just throwing it out there
this this board does not exist for my
benefit um but I would prefer that and
unless you want to make a motion to
change this budget could we vote on the
to move this budget forward to the
meeting vote on the uh on the on the
motion at hand and then if it fails
we'll we'll we'll continue with that or
we can talk about it
after Mark I make the motion go ahead
Bill we already we already have a mo I
would make the motion that we accept the
budget at the budget as presented the
budget that we have the authority to act
on right now well well we've already got
the motion in front of us right so we're
at the discussion point now
Rob Rob made a motion and you seconded I
think and I seconded it well and I mean
that's fine because we still have time
we have time tomorrow it's a separate
item though yep it's a separate item we
have budget is a separate item from this
budget oh if we vote if we vote to like
to be clear on on uh on the uh procedure
if we vote to accept this as the
recommended budget there won't be a
meeting tomorrow
guys can I say something to we're in
discussion the only thing that I want is
is respect for someone that's put a lot
of time and effort into whatever Liz is
going to tell us tonight I mean I feel
like I'm on the receiving end of that
sometimes and you know I you know put a
lot of effort into things and and then
you know everybody wants to move on and
I get that we're all very busy people we
have busy schedules but I at what point
can she just even if she doesn't present
can she talk to whatever I just want to
show her some respect yeah I mean I
think I think I think if if if Liz says
I'm not comfortable with this budget I
think we should reduce the Board of
Education line item and I think we have
the authority to do that and explain you
know that that's that that's her
thinking then we can you know we can we
should certainly discuss that as part of
this acceptance this this motion this
before us right I just want her to to to
be able to say what she wants to say and
I think that's the just respect for the
questions that she's asking you know
because I think she's you know I'm just
being an observer right now and so
that's off thank you yeah I just I just
want to make sure it's relevant to the
to the to the motion motion on the floor
that's really what I'm trying to do and
she did try to ask she asked it very
politely at the beginning if she says
yes does this mean she can't speak
anymore I'm just being a human I just
want and you are too Mark thank you but
and everybody that's what I'm addressing
right now is her concern that she wants
to just say
something yeah I yeah so my my question
is if I say yes to this motion and and
it passes then I can't say anything more
about my thoughts about the a AES budget
well we could we could continue the
discussion I think we could certainly
have more discussion in this meeting but
the next step in the budget process
would be to go you know there wouldn't
change the recommended budget okay so if
this motion went
down then what I have to put forward
could
possibly change the bottom line of the a
budget if it was so motioned and agreed
to
correct I it could I think we I think
we'd face a legal challenge honestly
because that would be in contradiction
to the Charter um but it could seems
like the Charter's kind of
I don't I don't think so the charter is
pretty clear it says
um the board of financial of public
hearing blah blah blah the board of in
preparing the budget the board may add
to delete from or eliminate requests
made by the various departments offices
and agencies except that the board may
only comment and make
recommendations on the budget requests
of the local Board of
Education to me that's pretty
unambiguous that the intention of the
charter um is that the Board of
Education sets the the
school uh budget for purposes of the
town meeting it doesn't mean that the
town meeting can't change the amount
that's really I think where the the
border contemplates that the uh that the
town budget meeting is where the board
of aded changes to the board of aded
budget can be
made that's that's I think to me it's
pretty clear and I wouldn't as as y as
long as I'm able to make my Spiel um
then I'm I'm okay with
that because at least if public if
people are watching and they want more
information they'll get this information
and then they can do what they want with
it at the town meeting yeah I think
that's important I'm okay with that
okay all I ask is that I don't I don't
get rushed All I Ask yeah understandably
and I I didn't mean to rush you but I do
want to make sure the discussion is
pertinent to the motion that we have in
front of us there so Mark I have a
question yeah we as as a board of
Finance members are also part of the
public so we can make whatever
suggestions we want at the town meeting
as well yeah absolutely so I don't know
if everybody heard or it was a little
broken up but Louise made the point that
as members of the public we on the board
of Finance can also make comments at the
public meeting or a motion for that
matter all
right that's good that's all I just
wanted you to have your moment to to
speak and whatever you want to present
you know everybody puts a lot of effort
into things so glad you'll have your
moment Liz yeah thank
you I think Eric has his hand up yeah oh
give you Eric what do you have let's
make real quick i' had given the board
of Finance about four meetings ago a
copy of the Town attorney's official
opinion on this um his opinion is that
the board of
Finance um and I'm not a legal scholar
um but in his opinion you can and I'll
just read the last sent or paragraph in
conclusion my answer your specific
questions are that yes the board of
Finance has the ability to modify the
bottom line of BOS budget and any such
adjustment must be voted by the board of
Finance before the combin budget is sent
to the voters for the annual Town budget
meeting um you know and obviously he was
talking about a different date since
this opinion was three years old or four
years old um so that's just a point of
information I'm not trying to say
whether you should or shouldn't y cut
understood yeah my in my view and I'll
just State my my view my view is that
the the charter is pretty clear
regardless of the the Connecticut
General statutes and the intention of
you know in in general powers granted
the board of
Finance you know the view of of the
charter is that the board of Finance
should not be the determining Authority
uh for the board of EDS uh line
item so that's what I based on
yeah I think the town the town meeting
is the is the appropriate place for that
for the
charter okay let's um you know let's
move forward with this motion and then
um I'm happy to give my Spiel
um okay any further discussion from the
board okay we'll go ahead and take a
vote the motion before us is to accept
the budget uh as it is presented to us
tonight as with changes we made as the
final recommended budget to go to the
town meeting uh next Wednesday all those
in favor I'm going to go individually
just because it's too complicated uh
with the way we are I can't see who's
got their hands up and everything uh
Bill yes uh
Liz I'm gonna say
no okay
uh Joanne
yes
Lise I didn't hear
Joann's uh Joan said yes yes um I'm
gonna have stain at this
moment
what I'm gonna
obstain she's
abstaining I'm going to say
no Rob yes
okay and I am a yes wait so we have um
four yeses two Nos and one
abstention as I read it um so the motion
passes uh this will be the budget uh
that we present to the town in the board
of or in the uh Town budget meeting next
town budget meeting
yeah
okay however yeah we should definitely
hear out
you
know as we
discussed okay I'm gonna um maybe a
little bit
um where we are yeah so the other so
we're going to go ahead and let any
other board members make any final
comments uh including Liz so we'll give
Liz the floor uh again I think because
we've done we've performed the main uh
meeting that we have to today I think
I'm going to step out and hand control
the meeting meeting over to Joanne if
that's okay Joanne yeah I've never
controlled the meeting before is is well
just just in terms of you know uh you
know Eric can manage Eric can manage
thank you but I I really wish you would
you would stay and and listen to this
I'm a little
disappointed I
mean 3
a yeah I appreciate it I just I have
I've got to travel in the morning and I
promise I will review the video once
it's available so it's it's it's an area
of concern to me I will say that yeah I
have I have some concerns over the
school budget
myself okay I just emailed you that um
document so I guess you're not the
person I should have emailed it to
um well let's let's go ahead and start I
I see well if you want to email it to
Joanne or I can she may not be able to
share it and can can Eric uh present it
it's just the one document right yeah
email it to me and I'll share
it turning it over to me and I'll you
know I'll do the directing like you said
that would be great if you could because
Eric can present your presentation Liz
yeah let Eric yeah yeah let Eric go
ahead and then I'm happy to interject
and I think it's important that everyone
has their time to speak or you know make
their motions whether they pass or don't
AB absolutely and I didn't mean to come
in try to sound like I was coming in
over the top or anything it just uh it's
been a week as we say said last week for
yes absolutely last week was a week but
um we're here believe is that what I'm
what you see is what I'm sharing is that
what you're looking for yep
yeah um so I I just
wanted to me it's really important that
we are uh honoring the taxpayers and
making sure that we are
providing that we're funding certain
areas of the Town appropriately for the
needs of the Town um one of the
narratives uh that I had heard quite a
bit was um that the school is just
growing exponentially and there's big
concerns about the growth of the school
but I do want it to be known that the
preschool is the driver of the growth
and the
preschool has been opened up to non-and
over students so I wanted to address
that so that the taxpayers knew that um
the preschool now represents
25% of the enrollment of the school and
this chart here is a high level just
high level shows K through six on the
top line um in any potential magnet
students that might be in there
preschool you can see how the preschool
has grown
um a decision was made at some point to
um to add non-end over students and I
think the intention was because they
could make more tuition money which is
what I was told um that decision was
made in an executive session so nobody
really knows exactly what the discussion
was around that um you can go to the
next
slide
okay slide P so this is just uh more of
a breakdown people were asking how large
the classes were actually this doesn't
show the number of classes but um it
kind of breaks it down a little more and
I can make this available to anybody who
wants it just um if people want to know
really what the enrollment of the school
is um the general fund is what we should
be concerned about K through six um
because we're told that the preschool is
self-sufficient um whether or not that's
true um I don't
know um and I wanted to highlight that
again it is 25% of our um overall
enrollment um and this is not about not
wanting to fund the school I'll just say
it's about funding it appropriately so
the kids get what they need and the
taxpayers wallets are
honored uh okay you can go to the next
slide and I think the next one's okay so
this this is the one that's most
important and you guys might want to
zoom in on this one um yeah it would be
helpful if we could zoom in I can barely
see it what you say there you go
nice we can look at the Top Line first
the Top Line basically is the budget
going back um to the last year ending
2024 um that was the the adopted
budget and I wanted to highlight that
they had an over 10 10 a half%
surplus and that's
astounding uh I
think the reason for the um for the
Surplus is over budgeting excessive
budgeting um the t uh Board of Finance
made an agreement with the Board of Ed
that they would uh we would take their
Surplus and put it into an AES Capital
fund for very much needed capital
projects um there's no doubt that the
projects need to be done um but on top
of that they get to keep uh the first 2%
into their
non-aps um so that's
$84,950 so adding on to last year's
budget we gave them a 2.6% increase and
here's their current um adopted budget
4348 million and then they're requesting
8 .76 for next year's budget so going
down can you go down to the next line
please I'm sorry I'm I'm I'm really
nervous I don't like presenting um nope
nope nope nope next line not next page
oh
sorry right there there right there yep
so I look at this and I'm like what does
what does this what does a school really
need to
run and in my estimation
what they needed to run in
2024 financially what they needed to run
was exactly what they spent which was
3,378
15131 that's what they
needed this is a projection based on
that number as a
baseline so if you look at that number
and say we approved the 3% actually 3%
for the next
year they would have gotten 3.92 million
825 and say we said fine you can have
your whole 8.76% and we added that on to
to uh to next
year the total would be 4.24
million my point is I'm sure in this
current year that we're in right now
there's going to be another
Surplus um
I
think
to first of all first of all no one no
one no one's going to accept that
8.76% increase um I think they probably
put that in there hoping for half and
I'm not even saying that they shouldn't
hire the teachers that they that they
want um I understand those those other
two classes are a little large but I
think they can probably afford it with
what they have and I I know that will be
disputed but uh
if you look at this
projection there are surpluses in every
year
and
um I I just
think I think the what they're asking
for is way too much I personally feel
that a 2% increase for
them will get them what they need and be
able to hire their teacher
um on top of that they now have a two a
2% non-aps fund that has 261,000
in
it if they run into trouble they have
that
money
um plus there are grants there are
grants every single year um if you
scroll down I'll show you the history of
the grants and I I know they're going to
say that they're you can't count on them
well let me show you the history you can
count on a good amount of them um I took
these off of the the website it's public
website where you can
uh research all this stuff um the prek
grants are the Smart Start and the
early I forget what it's called but
that's what the grants have been through
the past couple years and here's the
miscellaneous grants
the grants will come in and I don't
think the grants are factored into their
revenue when they create a budget and I
think that's why we get to the position
at the end of the year where there's
money left over and historically there's
a spending spree to try
to try to spend it down as much as you
can um and I don't think this school is
unique to that I think I think it's
probably a standard you use it or you
lose it right so um and I'm not really
even criticized in that
um and then the last slide that I have
here I'll just let you look at this real
quick is just to show that
um I pulled the per pupil expenditures
for the state of Connecticut and just
kind of uh skined it down to our area
just to show where where Andover stands
uh with our neighbors our neighboring
towns um
mhm so I just feel
like to continue to build a budget based
on your current Year's
budget is just
compounding compounding every year
you're com compounding the increase
every
year I don't think I don't think it's
honest and I don't think it's fair I
don't think it's fair to the taxpayers
and I was honestly wanting to share this
information for quite a while and I
waited because
um was kind of advised to kind of hold
off and I really was under the
assumption that we would have the
ability to um affect their bottom
line
um so if anybody has any questions or
you want to look at that other slide
with the
um the Baseline projection you happy to
ask questions
may I make a comment yes
please so the only thing that I would
comment on that is a little different
than what you
said is I have a different take on the
grants and the
surpluses um basically my take is that
as does a good job of bringing in grant
money that they I think they
appropriately
can't assume they'll get I understand
exactly what you're saying that they are
pretty consistently bringing it
in
um if it were true that they went on a
spending spree at the end of the
year um I don't think you'd see the
surpluses we've been
seeing so on the one hand I understand
exactly your point which is that they've
been coming in under budget kind of
consistently because of granty really I
I honestly think that's a good chunk of
why um and then they take that money and
they put it in the the% onlaps saying uh
but I don't think that they tend to at
the end of the year frantically buy a
bunch of stuff just because they can uh
to do their budget and I've see that in
the business world you know use it or
lose it is is absolutely a thing I don't
really think as does that um I
understand know
yeah I know they've done it I've heard
I've heard them say it in a in a
meeting but go ahead oh really go ahead
yeah yeah I
have go ahead you can continue I don't
mean to interrupt you because no no no
no I'm sorry yeah I should have
interrupted you I was giving it's okay
Liz um yeah okay I could be wrong um it
was my
impression that basically what they've
been doing is s saving up money really
more than spending it down but um the
truth is as you've pointed out and you
know this is fairly obvious to those of
us who've been on the board for for a
few years now they have pretty several
years in a row now come in with
surpluses that's true there's no two
ways about
that um so I'll stop there I I just
wanted to say you know the grant money
thing is is a tricky thing um assuming
you're going to get the grants versus
saying well look we we we get them every
year but we don't know exactly how much
there there's some play in that I think
there's reasonably people could differ
that's
all I I'll stop there because I I don't
want to ramble
yeah andless I just feel I just feel
this this 10 this 10% Surplus
I think the reason we're seeing the
Surplus is they
understood that there was a deal that
they could have the money into the
capital fund so it behooved not to spend
money at the end of the year and and
that's fine because I know there's
capital projects that need to be taken
care of and the school needs to be
maintained um and I'm all supportive of
maintaining the school and giving them
what they need I'm just saying
that if
if there's that
Surplus knowing those
facts
um I think there's probably more of a
surplus each year than we really know
about and because of that I feel like
it's
unfair to um well first of all to accept
the eight the 8% budget I think
that's I think it's crazy talk but um
but I'm not even arguing that they need
the two extra teachers I just think that
they can do what they need to do with
the um with the money they have and I
just know that there's a lot of people
that are struggling financially and
everybody is having to tighten their
belts and we as a town Board of Finance
are trying to show some respect for that
and trying to tighten the town's belt a
little bit um I
think I think that ads should do so as
well
Liz I mean only I I didn't want to
interrupt you or whatever I always
appreciate someone that puts a lot of
work into something when they're on a
board or so thank you for taking the
time to put this together I think it's
important that all of us are heard and
our opinions are out there you know
that's why we ran for a board like this
um we all don't have to see eye to eye
or agree on every single thing I mean
tonight you know is is an example of
that you know we're all going to
continue to follow what we think is the
right thing to do and put it out there
so um does anyone have questions for Liz
on this presentation that she put
together it's hard because we're in this
different mode so I can't see people I
don't Joanna can I speak for a minute
it's Kim of course I don't have any
questions Liz um I just want to say
thank you I appreciate this
presentation I have come through the
board of education budget as well and I
come about to the same information in
terms of percentage wise and what we
could recommend that they um put their
budget at I'm very uncomfortable with an
over 8% ask this year I'm going to mimic
the same things that Liz has said I
think it's tough on our taxpayers
to continue to ask for this things are
very very
expensive
and um I do have some concerns about how
big our prek program is at the end of
school and what impact that is having on
our budget I also want to say that I
think Andover School has wonderful
teachers
and I think lowering the ask won't hurt
the education of the
children that's all I have to
say thank you thank you Kim does anyone
else want to yeah I have a comment go
ahead Louise yeah Liz thank you for all
that um I think it it's an eyeopener and
I'm glad you had the opportunity to say
it at this forum so and it's being
recorded So other people in town can
hear it prior to the budget being passed
if they wanted to you know question it
more at the meeting next week so thank
you for your time and
effort thank
you and that's the point of all of these
meetings I don't know how all of you
felt but I I felt like we were sort of
directed tonight to what we should do
and so we all have to fall in line with
you know whatever proposals we're going
to make um and that's fine and we did
our job we're all here to to be
participants and do the very best we can
for our town that we're volunteering in
so that's why it was important for me
that whoever on our board has researched
or put some information together um has
their chance to speak and and be
respected while doing
it um I don't know does any other board
members have anything to add you know
with this final presentation there
because I understood from the
conversation that was going on that we
were moving it forward W and and like
Louise just
mentioned anybody that has opinions you
know it was great to have a good turnout
tonight of the public whether I always
want people to speak up to me if they
don't agree or agree you know we all
have to stand up for what we want so
negative or positive is fine um but I'm
glad to see the public came so anyone
else have anything they want to bring
forward thanks for the effort there on
that that presentation I mean I knew
that took effort that took time so thank
you thank you my husband would
appreciate
[Laughter]
that
flid right she
was right like the volunteer hours that
we put in and the research we do it
might not be well received but it's a
lot of time and effort you know to at
least bring go ahead Rob I think Eric
has something oh I'm sorry so I so I
sent you a some
information uh regarding a budget
message so you guys as you're all aware
per the charter the board of selectman
not or Board of Finance not only has to
present a budget but a budget message so
I just want to make sure you guys are
aware of that because whatever gets
published has to get published in the
next couple of days
so um I don't know how you want to
proceed with that um the budget's simple
I'll get it from Mark in the morning his
annotated F and we'll publish that on
the town's website but if you have a
particular budget message you as a board
want to present um please get it to me
within the next couple days so that can
be published also no thank you I know we
always have it correct for so I'm sure I
know Mark usually puts together a
presentation so I will send him an email
or you said you sent it to all of
us uh I didn't give you a
presentation but I gave you the
documentation on spending you'll have to
adjust that because you've made some
changes to it but that overall that
document's okay right okay so I will
follow through on your request to you
know let Mark know the things that we
have to have prepared I will look over
the spreadsheet too um there might am I
allowed so if I find any errors we're
not allowed to correct them I I think I
found one last year and corrected it at
the budget meeting is that what we have
to do that is correct because You'
adopted a a spreadsheet although I don't
actually have that Mark has the updated
copy so he's got the official copy that
you've all adopted got it of
course um let's see we already did the
vote is everyone comfortable with moving
to public speak at this point I don't
know if there's any more discussion by
board
members I'm
good thank you Bill I'm good okay good
li no I'm fine go ahead okay um Louise
and Kim all set yeah um I have one quick
question um goad presentation that um
Liz just did um can part of that or or
all of it be added to the meeting for
next week so the people that are there
can actually view that information as
well we can certainly find out I don't
know the the parameters um I know that
we have had additional documents at the
meeting
before we could enter it into the
minutes we could enter it into the
meeting packet or into the minutes right
right that's what I'm asking I think
think we're allowed to the document Eric
gave us last week as far as the capital
projects and everything update um we
could add what Liz just presented yeah I
think we're allowed to but I'm saying
because all of these Charter things come
up we'll just run it by him and make
sure but um thank you Louise for
bringing that up we'll check into that
thanks y of
course and now I'm going to do public
speak I guess one more time um um I'm
going to go to Scott
psan I'm good thank you okay um
Carol carolly I'm all set thank you
thank you um
Jesse uh hi yes I'd like to thank M loek
for that creating and presenting that I
think it's long overdue I really
appreciate that thank
you pleasure
Chris I'm not sure if she's still
involved
Marcy hi yeah um I'm very very impressed
with uh Liz's presentation thank you so
much for all that I imagine it was uh
took a lot of time time uh I know in
these volunteer
positions there's a couple ways you can
go about it and you can either go about
it and uh work really hard to make sure
your your time is well spent and you're
doing what you can for the
town or you can you know sit by and
rubber stamp and you know just allow
everyone to have whatever money they
want I mean that's the easiest thing to
do but uh but I know how hard it is to
ask the the questions and uh you know
ask fiscal restraint from you know our
Town's workers so uh I appreciate the
effort that you guys are all doing there
so thank you so much thank you Marcy uh
Leanne
Hutchinson yes um I also want to thank
Liz um for putting that together I
learned some things tonight and I want
to thank the board for seeing that she
was able to speak because you um
obviously as you know you spent um a few
minutes at least determining um if she
was going to be able to continue to
speak tonight or if it was going to take
place another time depending on
apparently your vote on the overall
budget so um also as somebody who asked
an informational question during the
first public speak um I appreciate this
um Liz's
presentation great thank you lean okay I
don't don't see any
other Eric did I miss anyone can you see
more people than I think I got everyone
but Chris Chris herac oh I'm she's the
she's the assistant here I've got no
comment
Joanne thank you I did ask you Chris did
you hear me yeah I had trouble unmuting
it you moved a little too fast I just
want you to know that I did see you no
problem yeah is anybody in the um
community room still
I don't see that on my screen is it
still there oh and community room my
apologies it's showing
muted yeah you un I looked a couple
minutes ago there's nobody left in the
community room okay thank you thanks
Eric well according to my calculations
it looks like we got everyone so we're
moving on to our final um number of the
night which would be adjournment would
anyone like to make a motion to adjourn
the meeting I'll motion to I'll you
Bill I have to accept I think there's
proceed guys so I'm gonna accept lizz's
first as the motion for the to for
adjournment and then would anyone like
to Second it I will Kim okay Kim Kim
psan is seconding the motion so this
time I'm going to remember to take a
vote I just shut off the last time so uh
all those in favor say I
hi okay I think that's everyone I myself
I did forget discussion sorry I always
me in procedure does anyone have
anything they want to
discuss okay